
   Lineo - The Embedded Linux Solutions Company Home - Company - Site Map
   - Contact Us - Shop 
   --Main Menu--
   
                                                           File Index    
                                                                         
                                                                Products 
                                                                Services 
                                                                 Support 
                                                           Developer Info
                                                                Downloads
                                                           Hints & Tricks
                                                                 How To's
                                                              Open Source
                                                           Resource Links
                                                                Technical
                                                                Bulletins
                                                             White Papers
                                                                Partners 
                                                           News & Events 
                                                               Education 
                                                                         
                                                              Search Site
                                                                 ________
                                                                   Submit
                                                                         
   
   Comparing two approaches to real-time Linux
   
   Tim Bird, CTO of Lineo (Dec. 21, 2000)
   
   In recent years, two alternative approaches to providing real-time
   services within Linux systems have surfaced. In this paper, I will
   define these two systems and discuss some of the main advantages and
   disadvantages of each.
   
   The two share some interesting similarities. However, they also have
   some important distinctions which impact their appropriateness for
   various types of "real-time" applications, which span a broad spectrum
   from what is termed "hard real-time," to what is considered "soft
   real-time."
   
   The two approaches will be referred to as "preemption improvement" and
   "interrupt abstraction."
   
   Preemption Improvement
   
   In the preemption improvement approach, the Linux kernel code is
   modified to reduce the amount of time that the kernel spends in
   non-preemptible sections of code. In general, the strategy is to
   reduce the length of the longest section of non-preemptible code in
   order to minimize the latency of interrupts or real-time task
   scheduling in the system. The reason this is important is that the
   amount of time spent in the longest section of non-preemptible code is
   the shortest scheduling latency that can be guaranteed for a hard
   real-time system running on Linux. This, of course, has a direct
   impact on the value that the real-time system can provide.
   
   It is interesting to note that there are multiple ways of trying to
   improve preemptibility in the Linux kernel. One is to add additional
   points in the Linux kernel, where the currently executing kernel
   thread relinquishes control (or explicitly makes itself available for
   preemption). The code to do this is often referred to as "low latency
   patches", the most famous of which has been written by Ingo Molnar, a
   prominent Linux kernel contributor.
   
   Another technique, recently pioneered by MontaVista, is a system
   utilizing SMP macros already in the Linux kernel to treat the machine
   as if it were running SMP even on a uniprocessor system. Then the
   preemption capabilities of the kernel used to provide SMP support are
   automatically invoked to enhance the preemptibility of the Linux
   kernel.
   
   Another interesting aspect of this approach is that it is usually
   coupled with a new scheduler implementation that provides fixed
   overhead for scheduling real-time tasks. This scheduler is put in
   place in front of the normal Linux process scheduler, in order to give
   real-time tasks scheduling priority (as well as fixed scheduling
   cost).
   
   Interrupt Abstraction
   
   The other major approach to providing real-time with the Linux kernel
   is what I refer to as "interrupt abstraction". In this approach, a
   separate scheduler is also used. However, instead of trying to
   instrument the existing Linux kernel in order to increase
   preemptibility, the entire kernel is made preemptible by having a
   separate hardware-handling layer intercept and manage the actual
   hardware interrupts on a system. This hardware abstraction layer has
   complete control over the hardware interrupts, and simulates the
   interrupts up to the Linux kernel in a way that allows the kernel to
   run unmodified on the real-time scheduler. This system is often
   described as a micro-kernel system, where the full Linux kernel runs
   as the lowest priority task alongside real-time tasks in the system on
   top of the real-time scheduler.
   
   This approach is provided by two different real-time Linux projects:
   the RTLinux system, which originated at the University of New Mexico;
   and the Real Time Application Interface (RTAI), which originated at
   the University of Milan, in Italy.
   
   Limitations of the Preemption Improvement model
   
   The preemption improvement model of real-time support in the Linux
   kernel suffers from several key limitations.
   
   Limits to guarantees
   
   First, while this system does result in increased general
   preemptibility in the Linux kernel, (thus providing an environment for
   decreased real-time context switch latencies), there are severe limits
   on the guarantees that can be made about the latencies. You will often
   see statements in the literature about this approach with wording such
   as "the longest measured interrupt latency". The reason for this is
   that it is impossible to provide a guarantee about the latency for
   this approach, unless every possible code path in the kernel is
   examined. Thus, the discussion always revolves around historical
   measurements and observations -- NOT on a guarantee based on complete
   analysis of code paths.
   
   A normal Linux kernel in the embedded space is somewhere between 300K
   to 500K. The code for the entire Linux kernel runs into about 40
   megabytes of source code. Code is added to and modified on a daily
   basis in the source base. Thus, it is impossible in the general case
   to make any certifiable guarantee about the longest possible
   non-preemptible code path in the Linux kernel. The amount of code
   examination that would be required for this type of guarantee is
   prohibitive.
   
   Implementers of the preemption improvement systems have utilized a
   variety of techniques to identify and eliminate "problem" code paths
   in the Linux kernel. MontaVista, for example, has issued some tools
   and instrumentation patches to analyze latencies in the Linux kernel.
   However, it should be noted that none of these techniques is
   exhaustive. That is, no one has gone to the effort of analyzing every
   possible code path, especially when coupled with error conditions.
   Note that it is not even possible in a test environment to simulate
   every conceivable error condition that the Linux kernel might
   encounter. This makes the analysis statistical in nature rather than
   comprehensive and conclusive.
   
   What this essentially means, is that guarantees of hard real-time
   performance can not be made in this environment. While this approach
   appears to produce favorable results for soft real-time uses, it
   cannot produce a system with hard real-time capabilities.
   
   Difficulty of maintenance
   
   A second major problem with the preemption improvement approach to
   real-time is that it imposes an additional burden on all contributing
   Linux kernel programmers. Not only must all current Linux code by
   analyzed for preemptibility, but new code added to the kernel must
   meet the strict requirements that it not introduce additional long
   non-preemptible kernel code paths.
   
   It is more difficult to program fully preemptible algorithms than it
   is to program non-preemptible algorithms. This means that this
   approach imposes a large burden (and I believe an unrealistic one) on
   kernel programmers. Requiring preemptibility analysis on all new
   drivers or kernel features would unnecessarily slow the rate of kernel
   development. Not requiring preemptibility analysis on new kernel code
   leaves the kernel subject to non-measurable code path latencies.
   Either case leads to undesirable effects. One of the main reasons that
   developers and companies are interested in Linux is the rate at which
   the kernel is enhanced and debugged (modified). Crippling this rate in
   order to guarantee real-time performance would do serious damage to
   the value proposition that Linux provides.
   
   Risk of bugs
   
   Another major problem with the preemption improvement approach is that
   it requires substantial modifications to the Linux kernel, spread
   throughout the kernel. This poses the risk of introduction of bugs
   into the Linux kernel by the preemption improvement patches. In
   general, the larger a large-scale patch, the more likely it is to
   disturb the complex inner workings of the Linux kernel.
   
   Limitations of the Interrupt Abstraction model
   
   In contrast to the above problems, with the interrupt abstraction
   model, the Linux kernel is largely untouched. For example, the patch
   for the X86 version of Linux is only 9 lines long. The Linux kernel
   runs essentially unmodified under this system, and thus will run as
   expected for all kernel sub-systems (such as drivers), as well as
   user-space programs and applications. No code path analysis of the
   kernel is required. The only code that needs extensive analysis is the
   real-time scheduler (and associated IPC and service code), and the
   hardware abstraction layer. In its entirety, this code amounts to only
   about 64K. Several of the modules in this system are optional,
   bringing the total amount of code that must be analyzed to under 30K
   for most applications. Of course, this code already has been analyzed
   extensively by a large body of real-time experts.
   
   However, the interrupt abstraction model also has some important
   limitations that developers should be aware of.
   
   Unique programming model for real-time tasks
   
   Currently, this model requires that real-time tasks be implemented as
   Linux kernel loadable modules. This is the same format that is used
   for other kernel features, such as file systems, device drivers,
   alternate loaders, and others. Kernel loadable modules utilize several
   APIs that are different from the POSIX APIs available for normal Linux
   process development. However, it should be noted that the bulk of the
   APIs used for real-time tasks is the same as that used for Linux
   drivers. There is copious documentation and examples for writing code
   for this environment, and it is a Linux environment.
   
   It should be noted that the APIs to deal specifically with the
   real-time environment are new to the Linux kernel. A few different
   APIs can be used for real-time task management and communication,
   including a set of POSIX real-time APIs. This means that real-time
   tasks can be programmed using industry standard POSIX APIs for
   real-time systems.
   
   A solution, but with caveats
   
   There is work under way to produce a version of this system (at least
   with the RTAI project), which will allow scheduling using the
   real-time scheduler with a user-space process. This solution, once
   completed, should prove attractive for those who wish to avoid loading
   their real-time tasks in kernel mode.
   
   However, it is important to recognize that even this system will have
   some important drawbacks, compared to a system where all real-time
   tasks reside in the Linux kernel. The most important one is that there
   are certain context switch latencies involved when a process is
   switched into in user space (due to MMU processing overhead, cache
   line flushes, and other things), that will inherently yield more
   jitter, and thus worse case guaranteed task switch latencies.
   
   Anticipating objections
   
   There are a few more objections to the interrupt abstraction approach
   which are often raised, and which I will address.
   
   "But it's not Linux!"
   
   Proponents of the preemption improvement model often say that this
   system is "not really Linux". For this assertion to have any meaning,
   one has to determine just what exactly it means for something to be
   Linux. A general consensus in the community is that Linux is what
   Linus Torvalds says it is. He is the primary moderator of what goes
   into the main kernel tree, and thus decides what features will become
   a standard part of Linux. However, this metric is not useful in this
   case, since neither approach has yet been incorporated into the main
   Linux kernel. Indeed, every single Linux vendor (in the desktop,
   server, and embedded markets) ships a modified Linux kernel that
   deviates from the official source base as published on kernel.org.
   
   If Linux is instead defined by the Linux API in user space, then this
   also poses a problem. Very few would dispute that an Ethernet driver
   is a part of Linux. Ethernet drivers are coded in a manner requiring
   special skills, as kernel modules, using a special in-kernel API. The
   same can be said of real-time tasks intended to be used with the
   interrupt abstraction model of Linux real-time.
   
   Finally, at least one more definition of Linux would include the basic
   correctness and robustness that is provided by the kernel due to the
   peer-review and contributions of the open source community. Making
   large-scale modifications to the Linux kernel without the same level
   of peer review and open source community involvement potentially
   damages that value that developers have come to expect.
   
   On the need for a different programming model . . .
   
   It is true that writing Linux kernel modules requires different
   programming skills than does writing a Linux application process.
   However, these skills are likely to be required by an embedded
   developer anyway, for such other things as device drivers, board
   initialization code, and other kernel features that are
   required for embedded projects.
   
   Other arguments often thrown up are other issues related to writing
   your application in kernel space, like the absence of normal process
   memory protection features. A very significant reason that people are
   adopting a full-featured operating system like Linux is that the
   embedded market is tending towards complex system requirements, and
   thus increased system code complexity. Memory protection,
   comprehensive resource management, and process isolation are important
   keys to building a robust complex embedded system. However, these
   arguments ignore the fact that using the interrupt abstraction model
   does not require that the entire application or system be written in
   kernel space.
   
   Indeed, it is undesirable to put everything into the kernel. The
   nature of the complex systems that embedded designers want to build is
   such that there are now significant portions of the application that
   do NOT have real-time requirements. For example, an industrial control
   application may have hard real-time data acquisition requirements, as
   well as other aspects (such as data storage, networking, display and
   presentation, data transformation, and others) which do not require
   hard real-time capabilities. This division is true more often than
   not.
   
   It is faulty logic to assume, just because an application is written
   in user space, that the portions requiring hard real-time performance
   will therefore be more easily written, or especially that they will be
   able to take advantage of the full POSIX API without limitation. For
   example, when a user-space thread is switched onto the real-time
   scheduler in the preemption improvement model, it must avoid using
   APIs and system calls which would eliminate its real-time
   characteristics.
   
   In general, this means it must avoid using networking, disk I/O,
   memory allocations, and other services which cannot be guaranteed to
   respond with certain latencies. Also, this thread must be isolated
   from other non-real-time threads in the application (that DO use these
   services). So, whether the hard real-time portion of the application
   is implemented in kernel space or user space, there are a host of
   issues that the real-time designer will have to deal with, in order to
   preserve the real-time guarantees of the system.
   
   Although programming in the kernel and implementing real-time tasks as
   loadable modules does impose an extra learning burden, this burden is
   extremely minor compared to the knowledge and expertise required to
   correctly design and code real-time algorithms in the first place. In
   other words, writing a kernel module is probably one of the least of
   your worries when you undertake to write an application with some
   real-time requirements. In some cases, being forced to
   separate the real-time tasks into kernel modules can help define and
   clarify the separation between the real-time and non-real-time
   portions of the application.
   
   Conclusion: "Different strokes for different folks"
   
   In conclusion, while the preemption improvement model does provide
   some key benefits for developing certain types of real-time
   applications, it is incapable of yielding true hard real-time
   performance. Attempting to do so would certainly incur costly
   penalties in terms of other Linux benefits -- such as driver breadth
   or development pace -- in order to achieve true guarantees of hard
   real-time latencies.
   
   Therefore, although the preemption improvement model does hold promise
   as a means to obtain soft real-time capabilities from Linux, which can
   benefit all Linux applications, it is unlikely to provide a viable
   long-term solution for Linux tasks that require true hard real-time
   performance.
   
   The interrupt abstraction model, on the other hand, while imposing
   minor programming burdens on the embedded developer, is immediately
   capable of providing a true hard real-time environment for
   appropriately written applications within a Linux environment.
     _________________________________________________________________
   
   Author's bio: As Lineo's CTO, Tim Bird is accountable for the
   architecture, design and development of Lineo's embedded operating
   system platforms and applications. He holds bachelor's and master's
   degrees in Computer Science from Brigham Young University. Bird began
   his career as an engineer at Novell, Inc., where, in 1993, he began
   working with Linux. In 1995, he joined Caldera, Inc. as a senior
   developer. In 1998, Bird helped create the Caldera division that
   eventually became Lineo, Inc. in 1999. He is also co-author of
   "Special Edition: Using OpenLinux" by MacMillan Publishing.
   
   
     Products | Services | Support | Developer Info | Partners | News &
                                   Events
   © 2000 Lineo. All Rights Reserved. Website Terms & Conditions of Use.
