[Image]

We appreciate your interest in the Digital Wallet. We hope
the information below will answer most of your questions?

General

Who is Minds@Work?
We are an engineering and marketing company geared toward
developing cutting edge products and technologies.

Is Minds@Work a publicly traded company?
Currently, Minds@Work is a private company.

What is the Digital Wallet?
The Digital Wallet is a Portable Smart Storage (PSS) hard
drive that allows the transfer and storage of files from
digital cameras and computers. So not only can your files be
stored in one convenient location, your information can be
taken with you anywhere.

When is the Digital Wallet Shipping?
Shipping for the award winning Digital Wallet is scheduled
for late June 2000. You'll be able to purchase the Digital
Wallet from major electronic retail stores. We'll be getting
more specific on our corporate web site to be launched June.

Has the Digital Wallet been covered in the News?
Yes! The Digital Wallet has been covered in:

Popular Mechanics (The Digital Wallet Won Editors Choice
Award for Most Innovative Product)
PC World
Portable Computing Magazine
Sound & Vision Magazine
And soon to be Wired Magazine

What is the Price of the Digital Wallet?
MSRP for Digital Wallets are:
    -  3GB $349
    -  10GB $449
    -  20GB $549

What colors will the Digital Wallet come in?
The unit will come in the following two colors: 1) Silver
and black 2) Translucent blue

How big is the Digital Wallet?
Physically, the Digital Wallet is 5 inches tall, 3 ½ inches
wide and 1 inch thick. It weights less than 10 ounces making
transporting easy especially, if you purchase the specially
made carrying case.

What is the storage capacity?
    -  3GB
    -  10GB
    -  20GB

What is the Digital Wallet's interface?
The Digital Wallet connects to a PC or Mac via USB.

Which digital cameras does the Digital Wallet support?
The Digital Wallet is compatible with all digital cameras
that use:
Compact Flash
SmartMedia Flash
Intel Miniature Flash (Strata Flash)
Sony Memory Stick
IBM Micro Drive
MMC MultiMedia Card

Does the Digital Wallet come with a Warranty?
The Digital Wallet comes with 1 Year Limited Warranty.

What software does it use? Will it be capable to use
Japanese software?
The Digital Wallet uses software developed by Minds@Work.
The primary goal of the software is to allow you to upload,
download and view the files you have stored on the Digital
Wallet. The software does not function as like that of a
PDA. The software in the Digital Wallet is centric the
storage functions.

What interface does it use?
As noted on our web site in the FAQs, the Digital Wallet
interfaces with both PCs
and MACs by way of USB. Through this interface, you can
upload and download
files to and from your PC.

You may also transfer digital pictures from a digital camera
by way of the camera's FLASH card. This FLASH cards fits
into a PCMCIA adapter then slides into the PCMCIA slot int
he Digital Wallet at which time you can download the
contents of
the FLASH card to the Digital Wallet's 8GB 2.5 inch hard
disk.

Your web site mentions that the Digital Wallet works with
the 'memory stick', 'compact flash' , etc... how does it
interface with these?
As mentioned earlier, the FLASH card fits into a PCMCIA
adapter, which then fits into the PCMCIA slot in the Digital
Wallet. The Digital Wallet comes with (which?) adapter.

The Digital Wallet will also take:

Smart Media FLASH
Intel Miniature FLASH
Sony Memory Stick
MMC (Multi Media Card)
IBM MicroDrive

The PCMCIA adapter for each of the above 5 media must be
purchased seperately.

How durable is the digital wallet? Do you have test data
available for example can it withstand a drop of 3' from the
floor and continue to work', or shock data?
Yes, the Digital Wallet has been vibration and shock tested.
Operating vibration is 1.0G. Operating Shock is 150G and
Non-Operating shock is 700G. If you drop the Digital Wallet
onto the floor from 3 feet, the Digital Wallet will...

What is displayed on the Digital Wallet's LCD screen?
File transfer status, main storage capacity, file directory,
and battery status.

What does the LCD show/ read on the Digital Wallet?
The LCD will show the functions of the Digital Wallet. Once
the Digital Wallet had been turned on, by way of 3 primary
function options the user will be able to transfer content,
view content and view battery status. The user will also be
able to start and stop transfers, scroll and error codes to
name a few function.

Can the Digital Wallet work without a computer?
Yes, the Digital Wallet is non-PC centric. This means it
works even if you don't have it connect to your computer.
Because it runs on it's own micro-processor, operating
system, hard drive and rechargeable batteries, the Digital
Wallet doesn't need to rely on a computer to operate.

How does the Digital Wallet hook up to a keyboard?
Or does it hook up to a keyboard?
The Digital Wallet does not hook up to a keyboard. The
Digital Wallet is non PC Centric. The Digital Wallet runs by
way of it's own microprocessor, hard drive and batteries.
When the Digital Wallet does need to connect to a PC it does
so by wayof it's own docking station. The docking station
connects to the PC or MAC by way
of USB.

How are files downloaded into the3 Digital Wallet from
Digital Cameras? Flashcards would fit into the PC Card
adapter then, the PC Card adapter slides into the Digital
Wallet's PCMCIA slot. Couple of quick commands and your
pictures is now on the Digital Wallet's 2.5 inch hard disk.
This allows you to free up your flash card up to keep on
clicking!

Where can I get more information about the Digital Wallet?
You can download a data sheet off our web site. The address
is http://www.mindsatwork.net/dwdatasheet.pdf

Can I write from the Digital Wallet to a compact flashcard?
Yes! You can both upload and download pictures to and from
your Digital Wallet!

What control do you have over the naming of and transferring
of files
between devices?
Each time you do a download to the Digital Wallet, you
create a new separate file. The Digital Wallet creates the
name for you. Once you download to your PC by way of USB,
you can give it any name you like. In the case that you
decide to upload this file back on to the Digital Wallet,
you will see only the first 7 letters of the file name you
gave your file on the Digital Wallet.

Will you be selling the Digital Wallet internationally?
Yes, but not right away. We plan to sell the Digital wallet
internationally and the expansion will be in phases. The
steps are Asia then Europe. However, you'll be able to buy
the Digital Wallet from select web sites. These sites are
Minds@Work Authorized Web Retailers.

So, if you no matter where you are you are in the world, you
will be able to buy a Digital Wallet. We'll provide more
information on soon to be launched corporate web site late
April.

Hope this helped!
