
   [rtg.gif]
RTG Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
Last Updated: February 8, 2003

1. Where to obtain RTG?
The RTG home page is: http://rtg.sourceforge.net/  Thanks to 
SourceForge for their support.

2. Why did you write RTG?
Because other freely available traffic gathering programs:
  a) did not finish polling and graphing all of our targets before the 
     next polling interval
  b) did not retain data long enough or without averaging
  c) did not provide an interface to generate complex or custom reports or 
     graphs
  d) were resource intensive.

3. Who should use RTG?
If you have requirements to: 
  a) record large amounts of time-series SNMP data quickly
  b) keep the data for long periods
  c) generate complex reports based on the data 
then RTG is a good fit.  If you are simply looking to generate weekly/monthly 
traffic plots, MRTG (http://people.ee.ethz.ch/~oetiker/webtools/mrtg/) or 
RRDtool (http://people.ee.ethz.ch/~oetiker/webtools/rrdtool/) or 
Cricket (http://cricket.sourceforge.net/) are probably better bets.

4. What systems does RTG run on?
RTG is developed on FreeBSD and tested extensively on Solaris and Linux.  
RTG should compile on most UNIX boxes although autoconf doesn't always
work its magic properly.  If you modify RTG to support a new platform,
please let us know.  RTG does not support Windows.

5. How fast is RTG?
It depends on many factors.  Several hundred objects (OIDs) per second is
typical.  The current RTG speed record is over 1500 objects per second.  
We maintain an RTG speed record page at:
http://rtg.sourceforge.net/docs/rtgspeed.html.

6. Does RTG support 64-bit SNMP counters?
Yes.

7. Does RTG support SNMPv2c?
Yes.

8. Does RTG support SNMPv3 (encryption)?
Not yet.

9. Do I need to load a special MIB for device X?
No, assuming that polling device X's OID returns a 32 or 64 bit integer 
or a gauge.

10. Can RTG use a database other than MySQL? 
Quite probably, but MySQL is the only supported database currently.

11. Does RTG perform any averaging?
No.  If your database tables are growing too large, you may wish to
implemented a backend script that averages data into other tables.

12. Does RTG align the data samples, say on 5 minute boundaries?
No.  It is up to the supporting applications (graphers, perl reports)
to do the right thing and calculate the time between successive samples.

13. Aren't SQL databases a poor way to store time-series data?
That's a matter of opinion.  We favor the abstract interface that a SQL
database provides to the data.  This makes it easy to develop new and
custom reports quickly in any language (C, Perl DBI, PHP, etc).  The
new efficient database schema in RTG 0.7 was specially designed with
large RTG installations in mind.

14. RTG is not a very original name / What does RTG stand for?
We weren't feeling terribly creative the day we named RTG and we 
intended to pay our respects to the MRTG authors, Tobias Oetiker
and Dave Rand.  RTG stands for "Real Traffic Grabber."  Real as
in no averaging and Grabber to show its primary functionality.

15. I'm seeing strange spikes/dips in my graphs?
First, make certain that the device was not rebooted or its counters
reset.  RTG can detect counter wraps, but there is no way to detect
multiple counter wraps.  With 32 bit counters and 5 minute polling
intervals, the interface cannot be running more than ~114Mbps or the
counter will wrap multiple times.  Increase the polling interval or use 64
bit counter (recommended).

16. I wrote a {module,extension,patch,script} for RTG.
Please send it: rbeverly at users dot sourceforge dot net.  Thanks!
