MM in 2 Pages.  A selection of commonly used commands.  For more information,
please use the help command.  Note that commands may work differently at the
MM>, Read> and Send> prompts.

MM Commands

The term messages refers to message sequences, described on the other side of
this sheet.

help  ?				shows what help is available.

help command			explains use of a particular command (or a
				topic as listed in help ?).

command ?			shows possible completions for a particular
				command.

!command			does a shell command.

exit				exits from MM and expunges deleted messages;
				does not kill the process.

quit				exits from MM without expunging; does not kill
				the process.

bye				exits from MM and asks whether to expunge;
				kills the process.

send				starts the SEND routine.

read				starts the READ routine, and reads any unseen
				messages.

read messages			starts the READ routine, and reads specified
				messages.

headers messages		shows the headers (index summary) of specified
				messages.

reply messsages			sends a reply; similar to SEND routine.

delete messages			marks the message for deletion; it will be
				erased at exit or expunge.

forward messages		forwards the message to someone else; you can
				add a comment first.

remail messages			remails the message to someone else without
				comment.

print messages			prints the message; see the other side of this
				sheet for pcprint.

flag messages			puts a marker on the message; the message is
				shown whenever you start MM.

keyword kw messages		assigns a keyword, kw, to the message; for use
				in message sequences.

copy file messages		copies the message to another mail file, file.

move file messages		copies the message to another mail file, file.

get file			changes to another mail file, file.

get				changes to the main mail file, mbox.

save-draft file			(at Send>only) saves a message being typed in
				a file, file, without sending it.

restore-draft file		gets a message that was saved by save-draft to
				resume the SEND routine.

finger userID			shows the name and other information for the
				person with the userID.

finger -Q username		lists userIDs of people with the name (or
				partial name).

define alias userID		defines a mail-alias (nickname) for the
				userID.

define alias userIDlist		defines a mail-alias (mailing list name) for a
				list of userIDs.

define alias @@file		defines a mail-alias (mailing list name) by
				referring to a file listing userIDs.

who?				shows what aliases exist.

who alias			shows the userID for a particular alias.

show				shows current settings of variables and
				mail-aliases.

show variable			shows the current setting of a particular
				variable.

help set variable		explains what a variable does.

set variable value		customizes MM by setting a variable to a
				certain value.

save-init			saves anything defined or set during the
				current session.

expunge				permanently erases deleted messages (the exit
				command also does this).

Message Sequences

Messages are commonly specified by number.  Type headers all to see a list of
all the messages you have on file, with their numbers.  Examples of message
sequences using numbers:

5				message 5.

5:8 or 5-8 or 5,6,7,8		messages 5 through 8.

5,6,7,10 or 5:7,10		messages 5 through 7, and 10.


Some other message sequences are shown here.  Type help message-sequence for a
full list of sequences.  If you type headers all, you are using the message
sequence all.

*				the last message in the file.

all, inverse			all messages; all=oldest first, inverse=newest
				first.

after, before, on, since date	messages after, etc., a certain date (June 6,
				1990) or day (Monday).

subject, text word		messages containing a word (or part of a
				word) in the subject or text.

to, from userID			messages to or from a certain userID or user
				name.

last n				the last n messages.

flagged				all messages marked by the flag command.

keyword kw			all messages assigned to the keyword, kw, by
				the keyword command.

Examples of message sequences:

read since Monday		reads all messages received on and after
				Monday.

delete subject meeting from fuat  deletes messages from fuat with meeting
				  in the subject.

headers before 12/31/90		shows headers for messages received before
				December 31, 1990.

flag text bug from mel		puts a flag on all messages from melissa with
				bug in the text.

Reply Keywords

sender, all			send reply to sender, or to everyone on the to
				and cc lists of the original.

including, not-including	include the original message above the reply
				text, or not.

At the Read> prompt, common commands are reply, reply all, reply including,
reply all including.

At the MM> prompt, type reply and message sequence; then at the prompt send
reply...to, press return for the default, sender not-including, or specify
including, all, or all including.

Send Commands

Use help at the Send> prompt for information.  Some of the commands available
only at the Send> prompt include:

display, display headers	shows the message about to be sent, or just
				its header lines.

to address,  cc address, 
subject text			adds addresses to the to or cc fields;
				replaces the subject field.

erase field			erases a field (like to, cc, etc.)

text				goes back to typing text, after reaching the
				Send> prompt.

fcc file			puts a copy of the message in a file, file, in
				your current directory.

send				sends the message.

quit				discards the message, and goes back to the MM>
				prompt.

At the To: and cc: prompts: type any valid address or mail-alias; or @file to
read in addresses from a file (mailing list);

or . (period) to send to yourself.  Put commas between addresses when there is
more than one.  See the help topics addressing, bitnet and internet for
information about addresses.  See help for text-mode for help with MM's text
editor.
